FC-0068 docs: diataxis criteria documentation (#612)
openedx/docs.openedx.org: source/documentors/concepts/content_types.rst

Open edX Diataxis Guide
#######################

.. contents:: 
  :local:
  :depth: 1

Diataxis Definition
*******************

> The Diataxis framework is an approach to quality in technical documentation and creates a systematic organization. Diataxis identifies four modes of documentation:

Reviewer: Recommend linking to Diataxis homepage (I know you do it in a Note at the end, but that's pretty far away from here):

```suggestion
The `Diataxis framework <https://diataxis.fr/>`_ is an approach to quality in technical documentation and creates a systematic organization. Diataxis identifies four modes of documentation:
```

* `Quickstart`_
* `How-to`_
* `Reference`_
* `Concept`_

> Using diataxis, documentation can be organized to meet diverse user needs, making it easier to find relevant information based on the user’s situation or goal. This structure enhances usability and comprehension, allowing users to navigate documentation more effectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Diataxis, documentation can be organized to meet diverse user needs, making it easier to find relevant information based on the user’s situation or goal. This structure enhances usability and comprehension, allowing users to navigate documentation more effectively.
```

> For each type of document, you will find the explanation, the technical guidelines, and a matrix of criteria that will allow you to identify whether or not a document complies with the parameters of the diataxis used in the Open edx repositories. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each type of document, you will find the explanation, the technical guidelines, and a matrix of criteria that will allow you to identify whether or not a document complies with the parameters of the Diataxis used in the Open edX repositories. 
```

.. _Quickstart:

Quickstart
**********

> A Quickstart is a lesson that guides the reader through **practical steps** to complete a stated goal. It is **learning-oriented**. In other words, it is a lesson and a learning experience. For example, creating a virtual course can be a Quickstart because it’s a practical skill. A Quickstart may comprise the contents of multiple How-To guides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Quickstart is a lesson that guides the reader through **practical steps** to complete a stated goal. It is **learning-oriented**. In other words, it is a lesson and a learning experience. For example, creating a virtual course can be a Quickstart because it’s a practical skill. A Quickstart may comprise the contents of multiple How-To guides.
```

Although Quickstart topics may seem similar to How-Tos, they focus differently. Quickstarts are specifically built for beginners and are meant to help them gain experience with the product.

How to Write a Good Quickstart:
===============================
#. **Learning objectives.** Describe what the learner will accomplish.

	E.g., *“In this quickstart, you will…”* 

#. **Clear learning path.** Describe the topics, the order, and the activities your learner will follow to accomplish the learning objectives.

	E.g., *“To accomplish that, you will learn how to …” “You will create …”*

#. **Step-by-step process** explanation with just the necessary amount of explanation. Link to a more detailed explanation.

	E.g., *“Step 0: First, do x.”*
	E.g., *“Note: For more information about migration, click here.”*

#. **Output examples:** Give your learner clear expectations.

	E.g., *“The output should look like this: (add image).”*

#. **Accomplishment description:**

> 	E.g., *“You have successfully imported a course to your platform.”*

Reviewer: This is used as an example below of a How-To topic. Maybe

```suggestion
	E.g., *“You have successfully created your first course.”*
```

What Is the Difference between a How-to and a Quickstart?
=========================================================
The main difference between a Quickstart and a How-To is that a How-To focuses on completing one specific task, while a Quickstart guides you through a series of tasks to achieve a larger goal. Essentially, a Quickstart consists of two or more How-Tos that work together towards a broader concept. However, Quickstart seeks to be as straightforward as possible in its teaching processes since it is often designed to guide beginners through complex processes. In the case of a How-to, you can include more details and options for performing a specific task because it is focused content and can cover broader levels of expertise.

A How-to Guide Must Have:
=========================

#. **Problem description:** Describe clearly the problem or task and show the user how to solve it.

  E.g., *“This guide shows you how to…”*

> #. **Step-by-step process:** Indicates the order of the steps to make the process compelling.

Reviewer: The numbering is off here:

<img width="259" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4a225939-854e-48f8-a6e5-4f1912a20d97">

  E.g., *“Step 1; Step 2” or “ 1. , 2.”*

#. **Visual supports:** Accompany the steps with images, videos, or graphics to guide the person following the process.

#. **Reference links:** 

  E.g., *“To learn more about x, visit our documentation”*

Technical Guidelines:
=====================

> By following these recommendations, you will be able to write a good quality how-to guides:}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By following these recommendations, you will be able to write a good quality how-to guide:
```

Reference Material Must Have:
=============================

#. **An accurate and precise description** of the product you’re referencing.

#. **Provide examples of the uses and functions** of the product to make it more comprehensive.

#. Generally, a reference **lists details or provides a glossary** of aspects of the product that the reader needs. (For example: definitions, commands, options, operations, features, flags, limitations, error messages, etc.)

#. Provide **warnings** where appropriate.

Technical Guidelines:
=====================
By following these recommendations, you will be able to write a good quality reference material:

- Do nothing but describe. References have one job: **to explain** and do that **accurately and comprehensively**.
- **Be accurate.** These descriptions must be accurate and kept up-to-date.
- **Provide examples.** It is a valuable way of providing illustrations that help readers understand the references without becoming distracted from the job of describing them.

> - **The documentation structure should mirror the product's structure** so the user can work their way through it simultaneously. It doesn’t mean forcing the documentation into an unnatural structure. What’s important is that the logical, conceptual arrangement of and relations within the code should help make sense of the documentation.

Reviewer: I puzzled over this sentence a bit. I think this is more accurate but please let me know if you meant something else.

```suggestion
- **The documentation structure should mirror the product's structure** so the user can work their way through it simultaneously. It doesn’t mean forcing the documentation into an unnatural structure. What’s important is that the logical, conceptual arrangement of and relations within the documentation should help make sense of the product.
```

       - The document follows the product's structure but omits one or two (1-2) essential points.
     - - The document style can be more consistent, neutral, and objective.
       - The document has one or two elements that need to be clarified.

   * - **Needs corrections**
     - Document shares features of Acceptable and Not acceptable.
     - 

   * - **Not acceptable**
     - - Two (2) or more descriptions are not clear or accurate.
       - The document focuses on describing a task or concept; a reference doesn't have a specific objective. It only exists to describe.
     - - The document needs to describe the product consistently or objectively.
       - The document descriptions could be more precise.

.. _Concept:

Concept
*******

Concept documentation **clarifies and illuminates** a particular topic. It is **understanding-oriented**, and it could be considered a **conceptual guide**. Concept topics provide best practices or other guidelines for using the Open edX platform. 

A Good Concept Must Have:
=========================

#. A **clear title** about the topic.

  E.g., *“About XBlocks and Their Uses in Course Creation” or “What are Learning Taxonomies?”*

> #. An explanation that **answers a why question**. It could be descriptive, historical, or even propose different alternatives to explain the bigger picture and give context.

Reviewer: Numbering is off

<img width="164" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6ade1758-eee2-49dc-9827-5d4bdf17b4a2">

  E.g., *“What is an XBlock? The Open edX platform provides different components, called XBlocks, that can work to create a course, like text, video, assessment, and discussions.”*

Technical Guidelines:
=====================
By following these recommendations, you will be able to write a good quality concept guide:

- **Make connections to other things**, even to things outside the immediate topic, if that helps to clarify the subject you are explaining.
- Provide **background and context** in your explanation: explain why things are so.

> - **Concept guides are about a topic.** You should be able to place an implicit (or even explicit) about before each title—for example, “(About) Instructional Design.” Also, concept document names should use nouns or noun phrases that indicate theoretical or conceptual topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Concept guides are about a topic.** You should be able to place an implicit (or even explicit) "About" before each title—for example, “(About) Instructional Design.” Also, concept document names should use nouns or noun phrases that indicate theoretical or conceptual topics.
```

     - - The document style is consistent, neutral, and objective.
       - The document is clear and precise about the topic.

   * - **Very accurate**
     - Document shares features of Perfect and Acceptable.
     - 

   * - **Acceptable**
     - - The document manages to explain part of the topic and shed light on it, although it omits particular contents that could better contextualize the reader.
       - The title is related to the topic of the concept but could be more explicit.
     - - The document style can be more consistent, neutral, and objective.
       - Certain text parts need to be clarified.

   * - **Needs corrections**
     - Document shares features of Acceptable and Not acceptable.
     - 

   * - **Not acceptable**
     - - The document needs to explain the topic and ensure the reader understands.
       - The guide doesn’t connect the concept with how it relates to the Open edX product.
       - The document's title does not reflect the subject of the concept.
     - - The document needs to describe the product consistently or objectively.
       - The document's topic needs to be clarified.

> .. Note:: To learn more about the diataxis framework, visit `diataxis fr <https://diataxis.fr/>`_. The community adapted the framework for the Open edX repositories according to the platform's needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Note:: To learn more about the Diataxis framework, visit `the Diataxis homepage <https://diataxis.fr/>`_. The Open edX community adapted the framework according to the platform's needs.
```
